# Running the wp3 validation pipeline

The commands that follow assume that the path the validation pipeline has been set and the virtual env has been activated.
```bash
VALIDATION_PIPELINE="/projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/wp3_validation_workflow/"
source ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/venv/bin/activate
```

All commands below should be run from within the results folder of the pipeline being validated/benchmarked.

## Creating the validation checksum file for the first time

1. Change to the results folder of the pipeline 
2. Create a tsv file listing all the results files to be checksummed. This file lists the files to be checksummed in the file column and the checksum column can be left blank.
3. Save this file under /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/pipeline_md5sums and add the path to the md5sum file in the pipeline specific config under ```input:```.

Below is an example of creating the checksums for the Nallo wgs pipeline.

```bash
source /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/wp3_validation_workflow/venv/bin/activate
snakemake create_validation_data --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/nallo_hif_wgs_marvin/
```

3. Copy the newly generated checksum tsv file to the pipeline_md5sums folder with the specific name specified in the config for that pipeline (in this example config/config_nallo_hifi_wgs.yaml).

```bash
cp validation_results/new_validation_data.tsv /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/pipeline_md5sums/nallo_hifi_wgs_md5sums.tsv
```

## Validating the results from a new version of a pipeline

When updating to a newer version of a pipeline, or updating the config for a pipeline, the validation pipeline can be used to see which files have changed. This will also automatically run the hap.py and truvari benchmarking analysis for any HG001 and HG002 samples found in the results. See [GIAB Benchmarking](benchmarking.md) for details on the benchmarking.

This should be run on the latest commit of the develop branch that is subject to a dev to main pull request for CGU pipelines, or on a released version in the case of Nallo and other pipelines where releases may be made before we have a chance to validate the results.


Each pipeline has an associated workflow profile which points to the relevant config file:

### Poirot
```bash
snakemake  --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/poirot_marvin/
```

### Hastings
```bash
snakemake  --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/hastings_marvin/
```

### Marple

```bash
snakemake  --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/marple_marvin/
```

### Nallo hifi WGS

```bash
snakemake  --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/nallo_hif_wgs_marvin/

```

Any differences in the md5sums will cause the pipeline to error, but a ```validation_summary.txt``` file summarising the failed files will be generated. 
Look for any expected or unexpected changes. In some cases, like an update to a caller, annotation source or filter, we would expect the md5sum to change in a vcf. In other cases, a change in the pipeline or its configuration may lead to unexpected changes that need to be investigated further. 

Finally, update the md5sum tsv file following the instructions in [Updating the md5sum tsv file](#updating-the-md5sum-tsv-file)

## Changes in pipeline results files

### Updating the md5sum tsv file
In some cases an updated pipeline will produce new files that are not in the md5sum tsv file or checksums will have changed. In that case update the tsv file with the name of the files and their md5sums can be generated by running the create_validation_data workflow. The example below shows how to do this for poirot. 

First update the md5sum tsv file for the pipeline. Below we can take Poirot as an example:
Add the new files to the existing tsv file by appending the file names without md5sum values to tsv file:
```bash
vim /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/pipeline_md5sums/poirot_md5sums.tsv
```
Then run the create_validation_data workflow:

```bash
snakemake create_validation_data --profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/profiles/slurm --workflow-profile ${VALIDATION_PIPELINE}/workflow/profiles/poirot_marvin/
```
This generates a file called ```new_validation_data.tsv``` under the validation_results folder. This file can be compared to the existing tsv file with diff to see what has changed. Then it can be copied to the ```pipeline_md5sums/``` folder to update the tsv file:

```bash
diff validation_results/new_validation_data.tsv /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/pipeline_md5sums/poirot_md5sums.tsv
cp  validation_results/new_validation_data.tsv /projects/wp3/Validering/pipelines/pipeline_md5sums/poirot_md5sums.tsv
```

### Handling files that are no longer produced by the updated pipeline
The pipeline will produce a log file called ```missing_files.log``` for any files from the md5sum tsv file not found in the results folder. If these files are not meant to be in the new version of the pipeline due to a name change, or deprecation of the analysis, then they should be removed from the md5sum tsv file.

## Investigating what has caused the change in a vcf

Below are a few suggestions on how to investigate changes in vcf files.

### Comparing SNV and Indel vcf files

```bash
bcftools isec -p HG24385_hard-filtered_isec v0.8.1_config_v1.0.4/snvs/family/HM24385/HM24385.hard-filtered.vcf.gz v0.11.0_config_v1.3.0/snvs/family/HM24385/HM24385.hard-filtered.vcf.gz

```

Check the folder with the vcf results

```bash
cd  HG24385_hard-filtered_isec
grep -v ^'#' -c *.vcf
```

In the bcftools isec results folder files 0000.vcf and 0001.vcf list variants private to each vcf. The grep count above should return zero if the variants in each vcf compared are the same.

#### Highlighting changes with git

If the bcftools isec shows zero differences between the vcfs, then you can use git diff to highlight what has changed in the vcf rows to cause the difference in md5 checksum. This is a good way to highlight annotation differences in the info field. For instance, if an additional frequency database was used, that newly added annotation source will be highlighted.

```bash
git diff --word-diff --word-diff-regex=.  <(zcat v0.8.1_config_v1.0.4/snvs/family/HM24385/HM24385.hard-filtered.vcf.gz) <(zcat v0.11.0_config_v1.3.0/snvs/family/HM24385/HM24385.hard-filtered.vcf.gz)
```
### Comparing CNV and SV files

Truvari's consistency tool can be a quick means to see the number of variants differing between CNV and SV vcfs from different pipeline versions
```bash
truvari consistency v1.0.1_config_v0.16.0/results/NA24385/cnv_sv/NA24385.cnvpytor.vcf.gz v1.1_config_v0.18.0/results/NA24385/cnv_sv/NA24385.cnvpytor.vcf.gz
#
# Total 4215 calls across 2 VCFs
#
#File	NumCalls
v1.0.1_config_v0.16.0/results/NA24385/cnv_sv/NA24385.cnvpytor.vcf.gz	4215
v1.1_config_v0.18.0/results/NA24385/cnv_sv/NA24385.cnvpytor.vcf.gz	4215
#
# Summary of consistency
#
#VCFs	Calls	Pct
2	4215	100.00%
#
# Breakdown of VCFs' consistency
#
#Group	Total	TotalPct	PctOfFileCalls
11	4215	100.00%	100.00% 100.00% 
```


